# Samen

Samen is a toolkit for TypeScript backend development. It has a minimal API, it's fast and it generates a type-safe client for your frontend. There's no need to learn new languages or DSL's: Samen understands the code you already have, bringing your backend and frontend closer together than ever before:

- Define functions on the backend and call these on the frontend.
- Throw an error on the backend and catch it on the frontend.
- Get compile errors when backend and frontend don't match up.
- Share models between the backend and frontend.

Which leads us to:

- No more custom fetch implementations, where you'd write extensive type-validations (or worse: cast it to a model you've expected it to be). Samen automatically validates all input before running your code.
- No more guessing what the path, arguments or error-codes of an API-endpoint are.
- No more unnecessary mistakes: Samen has your back.

## Design principles

- Code-first
- Declarative
- End-to-end type-safe

## Documentation

A complete set of documentation could be found at: [docs.samen.io](https://docs.samen.io/). For the basics, keep scrolling!

## Installation

Let's setup an example project of a server and client with the following structure:

```
samen-example-project
├── api
└── app
```

### Step 1: Set up the server

To initialise a Samen server, run `npx samen init server` in `./api`:

```
cd ./api

npm init -y
npm install typescript --save-dev
npx tsc --init

npx samen init server
```

> You can leave out the npm and TypeScript setup if your project already has it installed.

This does a couple of things:

- Install `@samen/server`.
- Create a Samen-file at `src/samen.ts`.

You can do these steps manually as well. The Samen-file is the entry-point for Samen to know what your code is, so it's important to keep it there.

### Step 2: Set up the client

To install the client, run `npx samen init client` in `./app`:

```
cd ../app

npm init -y
npm install typescript --save-dev
npx tsc --init

npx samen init client
```

> You can leave out the npm and TypeScript setup if your project already has it installed.

This does the following:

- Install `@samen/client`.
- Add `samen.generated.ts` to `.gitignore`.
- Create an example file at `src/samen.ts`.

You can do these steps manually as well. It's up to you what you want to do with `src/samen.ts` in this case. It's there to let you know about how to use the client, but that code could be anywhere in your app-project. You're free to check in `samen.generated.ts` into version-control, but we advise not to.

### Step 3: Run the development environment

Now would be a great time to run npx samen in the root of your project:

```
cd ../
npx samen
```

This will do the following:

- Run the server in `./api`.
- Watch your Samen-file at `./api/src/samen.ts`.
- Generate a client to `./app/src/samen.generated.ts`.
- Keep everything up-to-date as your Samen-file changes.

## Server definition

The entry point of a Samen server is the Samen-file. This TypeScript-file exports services, containing functions that return promises. An example of this could be:

```ts
import { createService } from "@samen/server"

async function helloWorld(name: string): Promise<string> {
  return `Hi there, ${name}!`
}

export const helloWorldService = createService({ helloWorld })
```

> An explicit `Promise` return-type of a Samen-function is required

We're exporting a service called `helloWorldService`, containing a `helloWorld` function. The names of services and functions define how you can call them in the client. For the example above, this would be:

```ts
await client.helloWorldService.helloWorld("Jim")
```

Samen doesn't care about how you write this down, or how you organise your services and functions. For small projects this could be fine. You can even inline the functions if that's your style:

```ts
import { createService } from "@samen/server"

export const helloWorldService = createService({
  helloWorld: async (name: string): Promise<string> => `Hi there, ${name}!`,
})
```

However, your functions would probably have more functionality than the examples so far. In most cases it's wise to move them out to their own files:

```ts
import { createService } from "@samen/server"

import * as userFunctions from "./user"
import * as articleFunctions from "./article"

export const userService = createService({
  login: userFunctions.login,
  register: userFunctions.register,
})

export const articleService = createService({
  getArticle: articleFunctions.get,
})
```

After the Samen client has been regenerated, these functions could be called based on the names of the services and functions:

```ts
await client.userService.login()
await client.userService.register()
await client.articleService.getArticle()
```

How you organise your functions is totally up to you! As long as Samen can find your exported services in your Samen file, it'll be all good.

## Using the client

The client is generated by running samen and it's based on the Samen file on the server. It could be used in any TypeScript based frontend project, or even on different servers or in node-executables. Go nuts! As long as there's TypeScript, you can use the Samen client.

You can initialise the client like so:

```ts
import { SamenClient } from "./samen.generated"

const fetch = window.fetch.bind(window)
const client = new SamenClient(fetch, "http://localhost:3030")
```

The Samen client is a class that takes a couple of arguments:

- `fetch`: Doing network requests can work differently, depending on the environment of your app. Provide the Samen client with any implementation of fetch in order to do requests to the server.
- `url`: The full url where your server is running at. We would recommend putting this in a configurable variable, because it would probably be different between local development and going to production.
- `options`: An object that contains additional configuration:
  - `context`: An object to provide the context for each service.

Once you've got an initialised client, you can call functions on the server like there're regular, local functions:

```ts
await client.exampleService.helloWorld()
```

## License

Samen is [licensed as Apache-2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).

## Credits

Built with ♥️ by [Press Play](https://pressplay.dev)
